Monitoring Architecture Overview

Authors: Joseph Kiniry

Version: $Revision: 1.1.1.1 $

------------------------------------------------------------
Revision History:

$Log: Monitoring.txt,v $
Revision 1.1.1.1  2002/12/29 12:35:59  kiniry
Import from move from Caltech.

Revision 1.1  2001/05/26 20:19:33  kiniry
Added BON design documents snapshot.  It has been cleaned up quite a bit
but still needs to be synched with Chara's current work on BON templates
and stylesheet.

Revision 1.2  2000/07/19 22:09:32  kiniry
Made monitoring diagram.


------------------------------------------------------------

Related Documents:

  Monitoring_Diagram.eps - A high-level diagram of the monitoring system.

1. Introduction
===============

Many modern systems are complex, concurrent, and distributed.  To
build a reliable, comprehensible, maintainable system we must design
in a set of vital features including statistics gathering, logging,
and assertions.  All of this information should be "tunable" while the
system is running, but the use of the monitoring system should not
incur a significant performance penalty.

2. Requirements
===============

Primary goals of the monitoring framework.  

The framework *must*:

o Provide event types supporting statistics gathering, message
logging, and assertions.

o Support run-time tuning.  Clients of the system (in particular,
debugging tools or support personnel) should be able to tell the
system which types of messages and/or importance level of messages are
currently of import.

o Provide some form of "typing" on events.  Types and their meaning
are defined by the designer at design/compile-time.

o Provide some form of "leveling" on events.  Level ranges and meaning
are defined by the designer at design/compile-time.

o Be able to log messages to a file, the system console, and over a
network.

Secondary requirements include:

o Tuning monitoring based upon the source class and/or package from
which the event originates.

o Be able to log messages to a database or a GUI window.

Things that are _not_ goals of the monitoring framework include:

o Dynamically defining new message types or level ranges at run-time.

3. Overview
===========

Modern application development is terrificly complicated.  Today's
developers are asked to participate in building desktop applications
in large teams with millions of lines of code.  Large-scale
applications must be built by judicious use of existing code and
ideas: code and design reuse, compositional architectures, patterns,
and other such models are the modern tools of our trade.

Concurrent and Distributed Applications

Systems that are concurrent and distributed are even more complex.  It
has been recognized that, without significant forethought to problems
of system statistics gathering, logging, and understanding,
maintaining such systems rapidly becomes impossible.

Modern Methods, Dark Ages

But how do most developers do development and testing?  Surprising,
many developers use advanced integrated modeling and development
environments coupled with a smattering of low-tech print statements.

What is wrong with this scenario?  First, it is an undisciplined
development methodology: there is little or no relationship between
application requirements and test code.  Second, there is no
relationship between component specification and component test code
suites.  Third, test code is manually embedded in the code that is
shipped, leaving a host of deployment issues to deal with at
delivery-time.  Fourth, output is unstructured and usually unparsable.
Finally, there is no easy way to redirect or log test output to any
destination other than a pipe or a file.

Even more incredible, popular languages (i.e. Java) are designed
without regard for system debugging and do not support important
debugging constructs like assertions.  (Even "archaic" languages
like C and Fortran have an assertion mechanism!)

Debugging in Java

Surprisingly, given its popularity, the Java programming language
provides very few built-in constructs for debugging classes,
components, and systems.

Typically, a Java programmer relies upon language features and
development tools for debugging.  Java provides array bounds checking,
static type checking, variable initialization testing, and exceptions
to assist in code debugging.  While programming environments provide
sophisticated source-code debuggers, most developers seem fixated on
using primitive printlns to debug their code.

Java is missing several traditional core debugging constructs as well,
the most critical of which is assertions.  Assertions are program
statements of the form "at this point in execution the following
*must* be true".  They are used to specify predicates that must remain
inviolate for a program to exhibit correct behavior.  Typically, if an
assertion is violated, a program is aborted, though in object-oriented
systems we often have options other than halting the program execution
(e.g. throwing an exception).

The Monitoring System

The Monitoring system defines exactly this set of functionality.
It supports gathering and processing statistics, logging textual
messages, and making assertions on system state.

Each system and/or component has a complementary set of monitoring classes
which define (a) the statistics that are to be gathered on the system, (b)
the run-time debugging and logging messages that are specific to the
system, and (c) the assertion types that are vital to system correctness.

Each of these categories of system events are defined at *design* and
*compile*-time; they are not typically defined at run-time.  A
designer knows what needs to be logged because she defined the
system.  

The debugger or support person knows what messages types and the like
are important to understanding what is wrong with the system as it is
running, so they "tune" the system and watch its behavior.

Filling the Holes

Given the requirements of this system, we have chosen to use the
IDebug framework as the "backend" for the monitoring system.

IDebug has been designed to "fill the holes in Java".  It is a
debugging framework composed of a set of JavaBeans and other classes
that provide fundamental debugging constructs like assertions, error
messages, logging, and more.  Applications and/or components using
IDebug have a unified, manageable, flexible and extendible interface
to debugging as well as a complementary testing process.

Thus, most of the debugging system is already written, as it is part
of IDebug.

4. Dictionary
=============

o Assertion - Represents a single type of important predicate that the
system should validate. Assertion failures result in everything from
messages or statistics being logged to system failure.

o Checker - Checks the state of the system for validity against
particular assertions.

o Collector - Performs the collection of particular statistics during
the operation of a program. Individual statistics can be registered
for collection, and may be activated or deactivated. The collector can
cache statistic collection in memory, and can also write statistics
and logging information to a long-term storage device for subsequent
analysis.

o Event - Represents a single important event of any kind. The event
includes a source, description, importance, and time, among other
things.

o Level - Represents the importance level of a particular event. 

o Log - Manages the storage and retrieval of events that are reported
by various parts of the system framework and/or the application built on
top of it.

o Logger - Performs the collection of particular statistics during the
operation of a program. Individual statistics can be registered for
collection, and may be activated or deactivated. The collector can
cache statistic collection in memory, and can also write statistics
and logging information to a long-term storage device for subsequent
analysis.

o Message - Represents a single textual message that needs to be
displayed or recorded.

o Statistic - This class represents a statistic that can be monitored
in the monitoring system. Each statistic has its own unique ID
(node-unique, not necessarily globally unique), a description, units,
and other useful information that is represented in this class.

o Tuner - "Tune" the monitoring system to collect specific types and
levels of system statistics, messages, and assertions.

o Type - a string associated with an event that specifies the type of
the event.  The set of core event types each have such a name and a
description.
